# MastersProject
**Comparative Systems Biology analyses of Lactococcus lactis subsp. lactis strain LMG 19460**

Diogo de Lucena Antunes

Mestrado em Microbiologia Aplicada

This Dissertation was fully performed at the Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, at Instituto Superior Técnico (IST), Universidade de Lisboa (UL), under the direct supervision of Professor Leonilde Moreira, Ph. D.

Professor Rogério Tenreiro, Ph. D., was the internal supervisor designated in the scope of the Master in Applied Microbiology of the Faculty of Sciences of the University of Lisbon

Abstract

Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) have long had a prominent role in human society, where many of its individuals are used to produce various fermented food products and a few others are clinically significant pathogens. Since the late twenty-first century, many of these bacteria have also demonstrated their potential as biotechnological organisms, thanks to their proven safety for human health. Lactococcus lactis is one of such LAB, with a long history in the production of dairy products and a recently well-established role in biotechnology. There, L. lactis strains have been used as microbial cell factories to produce recombinant protein, as vectors for mucosal vaccination, and more. L. lactis subsp. lactis LMG 19460 is a strain whose genome was recently sequenced and whose lack of intrinsic plasmids makes it an ideal candidate for biotechnological applications. For the better understanding and use of such biotechnological organism, genome-scale metabolic models, or genome-scale models (GEMs), can be a great tool. However, developing robust GEMs for organisms which have no available experimental data can be a difficult task, since they cannot be validated through comparison with published phenotypes. As such, strategies different from traditional methodologies are necessary.

Here, two GEMs were developed, one for the well characterised, reference strain L. lactis subsp. lactis IL1403 and another for L. lactis LMG 19460. The GEM for L. lactis IL1403 accounts for 575 genes, 921 reactions and 639 metabolites. It was reconstructed through comparative genomic approaches, where metabolic functions in strain IL1403 were inferred from high-quality published GEMs. The assembled model was then refined and validated through comparison with the comprehensive published data available for the organism. The model demonstrates good capabilities in predicting experimentally determined phenotypes of strain IL1403. Using this validated and working model, a GEM was then developed for the lesser-known strain LMG 19460. The metabolic model for L. lactis LMG 19460 accounts for 570 genes, 916 reactions and 638 metabolites. It is a functional model, capable of performing in silico predictions using data available for other L. lactis strains. However, it still requires true validation through comparison with experimentally determined, strain-specific phenotypes. As a first step in the experimental characterisation of L. lactis LMG 19460, a chemically defined medium was here developed and optimised, supporting clear growth and considerable biomass production when compared with published media (final OD600 = 2.02). The GEM for L. lactis LMG 19460 is capable of simulating unconstrained growth in this medium.
In future applications, both metabolic reconstructions here assembled should be further refined and validated, in order to fully develop them into high-quality GEMs. Then, these models can be of significant use for the further studying the metabolism of their respective strains, where they can be used to map high-throughput data and drive experimental design. Furthermore, by testing synthetic biology hypothesis and predicting the effects of metabolic engineering, these models will be invaluable tools for the applications of their respective strains in biotechnology.

**Keywords**: Lactic acid bacteria; Lactococcus lactis; genome-scale metabolic models; flux balance analysis; chemically defined media.
